[Illustration: Stele of Narâm-Sin, king of Agade, representing the king
historic period to trace the paths by which Sumerian culture was
and, although the southern Sumerian sites have yielded traces of no
Semitic conquest that Sumerian culture had a marked effect on that
Sumerian domination. It was also through the Semitic inhabitants
importance to determine the region of the world from which the Sumerian
form a theory on the subject from evidence furnished by the Sumerians
that the original home of the Sumerian race is to be sought beyond
racial unrest in Central Asia, which probably gave rise to the Sumerian
Stein, on behalf of the Indian Government, on the borders of the
observations have an important bearing on the Sumerian problem, and
Semites reached the Euphrates by way of the Syrian coast, and founded
whether they or the Sumerians were in earliest occupation of Babylonia.
The racial character of the Sumerian gods can best be explained on
Semitic; but the absence of Semitic idiom from the earliest Sumerian
That the Sumerians played the more important part in originating and
and art the Semites merely borrowed from their Sumerian teachers, and,
the original impulse came from the Sumerian race. Hammurabi's Code
legislation, is now proved to have been of Sumerian origin; and recent
strongly affected, was largely derived from Sumerian sources.
conflict between Semites and Sumerians, in the course of which the
monarchy marks the close of the political career of the Sumerians as
early Akkadian king Shar-Gani-sharri. The panel on the back of the
the Sumerian warriors are in striking contrast to the heavily bearded
chronology and the rendering of Sumerian proper names. The general
which the age of the Sumerian civilization is discussed.
The transliteration of many of the Sumerian proper names is also
the Sumerian signs; but there is also no doubt that the Sumerians
of Tello, is an instance in point. The name is written in Sumerian as
Sumerians. But there is little doubt that, though written in that way,
it was actually pronounced as Lagash, even in the Sumerian period.
of Sumerian art; to Mr. Raphael Pumpelly and the Carnegie Institution
        Babylonian sites--The "Sumerian Controversy" and a
        of Sumerians and Semites--The lands of Sumer and
        Fâra (Shuruppak)--Sumerian dwelling-houses and circular
        which escaped the Western Semites--American excavations
        at Nippur--British work at Warka (Erech), Senkera
        Shahrain (Eridu), and Tell Lahm--Our knowledge of North
        problem--Sumerian and Semitic types--Contrasts
        character of Sumerian gods--Professor Meyer's theory
        Sumerians--Path of the Semitic conquest--Origin of
        first traces of Sumerian civilization--Pre-Babylonian
        Sumerian culture to be traced to an age when it was
        not Sumerian--Relative interest attaching to many
        Sumerian achievements--Noteworthy character of the
        Sumerian arts of sculpture and engraving--The respective
        contributions of Sumerian and Semite--Methods of
        composition in Sumerian sculpture and attempts at an
        best Sumerian work--Casting in metal and the question of
        and engraving--The more fantastic side of Sumerian
        art--Growth of a naturalistic treatment in Sumerian
        in the prehistoric period--The earliest Sumerian
        its shrine--Buildings of the earliest Sumerian period at
        titles in the early Sumerian period--Ur-Ninâ the founder
        and household--The position of Sumerian women in social
        and on the march--Weapons of the Sumerians and their
        divorce--The laws of Urukagina and the Sumerian origin
        Close of an epoch in Sumerian history--Increase in
        Sargon of Agade and his significance--Early recognition
        of his place in history--The later traditions of Sargon
        and the contemporary records of Shar-Gani-sharri's
        Sargon?--Indications that only names and not facts
        authority westward under Shar-Gani-sharri--The alleged
        a policy of deportation--The conquest of Narâm-Sin
        Victory and his relations with Elam--Narâm-Sin at the
        Hussein Stele--Narâm-Sin's successors--Representations
        Sumerian reaction tempered by Semitic influence--Length
        of the intervening period between the Sargonic era
        marked the later Sumerian period--Evolution of the
        character of Sumerian ritual--The art of Gudea's
        by Dungi and the Sumerian national revival--Contrast
        evidence of Sumerian reaction--The conquests of Dungi's
        influence in Elam under Sumerian domination--Character
        disproved--The capture of Isin in Sin-muballit's reign
        career of the Sumerians as a race--The survival of their
        relationship of Sumerian culture to that of
        Nile--Relations of Elam and Sumer--Evidence of early
        the Sumerian Problem
I. Stele of Narâm-Sin, representing the king and his allies in triumph
IV. Limestone figure of an early Sumerian patesi, or high official
V. Fragment of Sumerian sculpture representing scenes of worship
X. South-eastern facade of a building at Tello, erected by Ur-Ninâ
XI. Limestone figures of early Sumerian rulers
XX. Mace-head dedicated to the Sun-god by Shar-Gani-sharri, and other
XXXI. Circular tablets of the reign of Bûr-Sin, King of Ur
XXXII. Bricks of Bûr-Sin, King of Ur, and Ishme-Dagan, King of Isin
XXXIII. Specimens of clay cones bearing votive inscriptions
1-2. Figures of early Sumerians engraved upon fragments of shell.
3-5. Later types of Sumerians, as exhibited by heads of male statuettes
14-15. Examples of early Sumerian deities on votive tablets from Nippur
21. Fragments of sculpture belonging to the best period of Sumerian art
of Sumerian art
the growth of a naturalistic treatment in Sumerian design
34-37. Panels of mother-of-pearl engraved with Sumerian designs, which
43. Early Sumerian figure of a woman, showing the Sumerian dress and
52-53. Seal-impression of Lugal-anda, patesi of Lagash, with
59. Stele of Narâm-Sin, King of Akkad, from Pir Hussein
VII. Plan of Abû Shahrain, after Taylor
the advent of the Sumerians began the practice of building cities upon
the Sumerians have been recovered; but the still earlier traces of
that a few palaeoliths have been found on the surface of the Syrian
desert, but in the alluvial plains of Southern Chaldaea, as in the
the same race as the Sumerians of history, though probably of a rather
Although the earliest Sumerian settlements in Southern Babylonia are
system of writing by the early Sumerians presupposes an extremely
of the Sumerians was disputed by a large body of those who occupied
What was known as "the Sumerian controversy" engaged the attention of
At that time not many actual remains of the Sumerians themselves
a number of Sumerian texts and compositions which had been found
are now known by the name of the Sumerians.
a theory was propounded by M. Halévy to the effect that Sumerian was
M. Halévy was that the Sumerian compositions were not written in the
from an examination of the phonetic values of the Sumerian signs. Many
that the subject-matter of the Sumerian compositions was not of a
of a secret method of writing. A study of the Sumerian texts with the
the early Sumerian texts as had been recovered at that time by Loftus
and Taylor in Southern Babylonia. For these were shown to be short
been undecipherable without a key. Yet the fact that very few Sumerian
an end to the Sumerian controversy, and settled the problem once for
That Babylonian civilization and culture originated with the Sumerians
centres concerns the period at which Sumerians and Semites first came
earliest period of Sumerian history, extended as far northward as the
Elam, the true area of Sumerian and Semitic authority may be regarded
resemble the Syro-Arabian desert, and it is only in the neighbourhood
miles in length.[3] But in the Sassanian period the Great Swamp, the
of Adab and Umma.[8] Senkera, the site of Larsa, also lies considerably
dated in the year in which Samsu-iluna constructed the wall of Kish
the Euphrates"; and Hammurabi, in one of his letters to Sin-idinnam,
regard Eridu, the most southern Sumerian city as in Akkad, not in
to form from their context, a very fair idea of what the Sumerians
as Sumerian towns. The city of Kesh, whose goddess Ninkharsag is
mentioned on the Stele of the Vultures, with the gods of Sumerian towns
of the fifth century B.C. Ibn Serapion applies the name in the singular
themselves in reed-beds and marshes; cf. G. le Strange, "Journ. Roy.
[4] According to Ibn Rusta (quoted by Le Strange, "Journ. Roy. Asiat.
Soc.," 1905, p. 301), in Sassanian times, and before the bursting of
[10] See Clay and Hilprecht, "Murashû Sons" (Artaxerxes I.), p. 76, and
Clay, "Murashû Sons" (Darius II.), p. 70; cf. also Hommel, "Grundriss
_ki-en-gi-ra_ in a Sumerian hymn, where it is rendered in Semitic
of the Sumerians" (see King, "Cun. Texts," Pt. V., pl. 1 f., and cf.
subsequent to the increase of the city's power under Shar-Gani-sharri
and Narâm-Sin (see Chap. VIII.); on the employment of the name for the
Ki-uri, or Ki-urra, employed in Sumerian as the equivalent of the name
yet been identified, our knowledge of Sumerian history and topography
case the earliest Sumerian remains have been considerably disturbed
comprises towns which were occupied mainly by the Sumerians, and, after
The greater part of our knowledge of early Sumerian history has been
Sumerian name of the city, which was known to the later Semitic
was called Lagash by the Sumerians, and that the signs which can be
the name among the Sumerians themselves. There is no difficulty in
soil were found some of the earliest examples of Sumerian sculpture
line of successful rulers, but as the most important centre of Sumerian
houses he regarded as tombs.[9] But in no period of Sumerian or
that it was a more important Sumerian city than Surghul. This has been
played in early Sumerian history, it is almost to be regretted that
the same tract farther to the south are Senkera and Warka, which were
period of Sumerian culture. Systematic excavations were begun here by
sometimes a light rose and a light green. Since all other objects in
itself suggests that Fâra marks the site of an early Sumerian town.
concerning the earliest Sumerians in Babylonia. Until the objects
separated its period from that of the earliest Sumerians of history.
bricks of Bûr-Sin I., King of Ur, which were discovered scattered in
Such are the principal early Sumerian mounds in the region of the Shatt
some of these do not cover Sumerian cities, but represent far later
settlement in this district during Sassanian times. Such are Dubâ'i,
It will have been noted that all the Sumerian mounds described or
retaken many times, and on Samsu-iluna's final victory over Rîm-Sin, it
southwards, for the Sumerian inhabitants fled to the Sea-country on
Samsu-iluna and his son at the hands of Iluma-ilu, who had already
established his independence in this region. Thus Samsu-iluna's policy
Another class of Sumerian cities consists of those which were not
Babylonian history. Niffer, Warka, Senkera, Mukayyar, and Abû Shahrain
Sumerian cities which stood upon their sites; but the greater part of
the god Enlil, was traced back to the period of Shar-Gani-Sharri and
Narâm-Sin;[24] and fragments of early vases found scattered in the
have thrown valuable light upon an early period of Sumerian history.
But the excavation of the pre-Sargonic strata, so far as it has yet
the neighbouring mounds of Senkera (Larsa), and Tell Sifr, were also
the earliest Sumerian period, while the sarcophagus-burials in other
evidence of early building at Abû Shahrain,[28] the comparatively small
At Abû Shahrain indeed we should expect to find traces of one of the
earliest and most sacred shrines of the Sumerians, for here dwelt
II., and so thorough was Sennacherib's destruction of the city in 689
the Sun-god at Sippar, which Narâm-Sin rebuilt, has been identified,
and Narâm-Sin's stele of victory afford valuable evidence concerning
of the problems as to the period at which Sumerians and Semites first
Sumerian side, more particularly by the sculptures and inscriptions
Sumerians invariably shaved the head and face, the Semites retained the
in the manner of the Arabs or Nabateans of the Sinai peninsula.[35]
contradistinction to the Sumerians with their shaven heads.
that the Sumerian had a prominent nose, which forms, indeed, his most
[Illustration: Fig. 1.--Fig. 2. Figures of early Sumerians,
worn by Sumerians and Semites, as represented on the monuments. The
earliest Sumerians wore only a thick woollen garment, in the form of a
later Sumerian patesis this rough garment has been given up in favour
with its opening in front.[37] Both these Sumerian forms of garment
Narâm-Sin on his stele of victory, and the Semitic plaid in which he is
in front like the later Sumerian mantle, and, on the other hand, was
not a shaped garment like the earlier Sumerian flounced petticoat,
[Illustration: Fig. 3--Fig. 4--Fig. 5--Later types of Sumerians, as
characteristic of those rulers whose language was Sumerian, the other
have shaven heads, like those of the Sumerians assisting at the burial
Semitic plaid, but the Sumerian fringed mantle, and we may conjecture
that, as he wrote his votive inscriptions in the Sumerian as well as in
by the adoption of the Sumerian form of dress.
surprising, therefore, that at this time both Sumerians and Semites
The monument thus belongs to the earliest Sumerian period, and, if we
the meeting of two early chieftains of the Sumerians and Semites,
By a similar examination of the gods of the Sumerians, as they are
Sumerian sculptures that have been recovered, but also that they were
in occupation of the country before the Sumerians. The type of the
Sumerian gods at the later period is well illustrated by a limestone
face, and his fringed Sumerian mantle.[44]
A very similar contrast is represented by the Sumerian and his gods
beard is obviously not Sumerian. The same bearded type of god is found
an archaic Sumerian relief from Tello, which, from the rudimentary
regarded as the most ancient example of Sumerian sculpture known. The
Sumerian, the god has abundant hair and a long beard.[47]
of the Sumerians should not be of the Sumerian type. If the Sumerian
Akkad before the Sumerians came upon the scene. He would regard the
clay. There is no doubt that the Sumerians were a warrior folk, and
of attack. The Sumerian method of fighting he would compare to that
iron is postulated on the part of the Sumerians. He would regard the
outward form. The Sumerians in turn would have influenced their Semitic
[Illustration: Fig. 16--Sumerian deities on an archaic relief from
Sumerian gods. But even from the archaeological side it is not so
complete nor so convincing as at first sight it would appear. Since the
later Sumerian gods were represented with full moustache and beard,
earlier periods of Sumerian history. But, as we have seen, their lips
contemporary Sumerians. The divine headdress, too, is different to the
Sumerian gods and their dress and insignia, which it is difficult to
his Sumerian title of Enlil from the beginning.[49] It is true that
argument;[50] but at least it proves that Nippur was always a Sumerian
shrine in the country by Semites and Sumerians alike, tells against any
of the whole of Babylonia before the Sumerian immigration. If that
of Semitic influence in the earliest Sumerian texts that have been
against the assumption that Semites and Sumerians were living side
date-formula of Samsu-iluna's reign has proved that the Semitic speech
must date from the establishment of Shar-Gani-sharri's empire with
and Urumush, was anterior to Sargon's empire,[55] and, long before the
WORSHIP BEFORE THE GODS.--_In the Louvre; Déc. en Chald., pl._ 23.]
records have been recovered, Semites and Sumerians were both settled in
Sumerian with shaven head and face.[56] But this may have been due to a
Of the original home of the Sumerians, from which they came to the
fertile plains of Southern Babylonia, it is impossible to speak with
it merely points to the Sea-country on the shores of the Gulf as the
earliest centre of Sumerian culture in the land. Others have argued
contradistinction to that of the Sumerians themselves.[57] But, in
the Sumerians did descend on Babylonia from the mountains on the east.
first suggested the theory that the Sumerians were of Mongol type; and
origin is to be sought both for Sumerian roots and for the cuneiform
which have been pointed out between isolated words in Sumerian and in
fortuitous. With the Elamites upon their eastern border the Sumerians
The scientific study of the Sumerian tongue, inaugurated by
after traversing the Syrian coast-lands. This first great influx of
culture of the Sumerians that the tribes which settled in Akkad were
[10] Cf. Messerschmidt, "Vorderasiatische Schriftdenkmäler," p. v. f.,
[17] This form of brick is characteristic of the Pre-Sargonic period;
Researches in Chaldaea and Susiana." From Andrae's notes it would seem
Oriental Exploration Fund (Babylonian Section) of the University of
[25] See "Chaldaea and Susiana," pp. 174 ff. and 188 f.
[28] See his "Notes on Abû Shahrein and Tel el-Lahm," _op. cit._, p.
mentioned after a number of Sumerian cities, is no indication that the
und Semiten in Babylonien" (Abh. der Königl. Preuss. Akad. der
[37] A very similar fringed mantle was usually worn by the Sumerian
represented in the Sumerian mantle and headdress may well have been a
result of the Sumerian reaction, which took place under the kings of Ur
of Sumerians, who are represented as pouring out libations and bringing
The changes in the dress of the Sumerian gods, and in the treatment
[52] In this respect the early Sumerian texts are in striking contrast
followers relied to disprove the existence of the Sumerians.
consist of a comparison between the verb "to go" in Sumerian, Greek,
of compound verbs in Sumerian, and the like; but quite apart from
the age of Sumerian civilization, and the length of time which
In attempting to set limits to the earlier periods of Sumerian history,
settling the chronology of the later Sumerian epoch, comprises the
early Sumerian date-lists have been recovered, and we are furnished
by them with an outline of Sumerian history, which has the value of
than one erroneous supposition. Thus the so-called Second Dynasty of
between the burial of Narâm-Sin's foundation-memorial in the temple of
the Sun-god at Sippar, and the finding of the memorial by Nabonidus
himself when digging in the temple's foundations.[4] Now Narâm-Sin was
of the still more famous Sargon I. On the strength of the figure given
Narâm-Sin, and that of 3800 B.C. to his father Sargon; and mainly on
the basis of these early dates the beginning of Sumerian history has
The improbably high estimate of Nabonidus for the date of Narâm-Sin
of Narâm-Sin; and the clay tablets of the two epochs differ so little
ruled in the Sea-country in the region of the Persian Gulf, its earlier
The available evidence suggests that the kings of the Sea-country never
be done by assuming that some of the kings of the Sea-country ruled
evidence in confining the kings of the Sea-country to their own land.
in the date-formula for the seventeenth year of Sin-muballit's reign,
shown that the capture of Isin in Sin-muballit's seventeenth year had
some thirteen hundred years later than that assigned to Narâm-Sin by
interval at one hundred and fifty years,[16] we obtain for Narâm-Sin
a date of 2600 B.C., and for Shar-Gani-Sharri one of 2650 B.C. For the
of Sumerian civilization can be traced in Babylonia back to about the
Sumerian civilization, but its achievements are by no means belittled
that this date marks the beginning of Sumerian culture, for, as we
origin and early growth of Sumerian culture, which took place at a time
when it was not Sumerian.
the extent to which Sumerian culture influenced, either directly or
the interest attaching to the Sumerian original is largely derived
of elucidating a later development. But one department of Sumerian
and engraving, as practised by the Sumerians, are well worthy of study
Sumerian origin, and it is possible to trace the gradual development
improved on what they borrowed; in that of the Sumerians the seeds
ancient of the sculptured reliefs of the Sumerians are very rudely
later reliefs, which belong to the period when Sumerian art reached its
which characterized the work of the Sumerians. Both the sculptures
referred to date from the later Sumerian period, and, if they were the
part of the Sumerian sculptors to break away from the stiff and formal
The Sumerians did not attain the decorative effect of the Assyrian
Sumerian worship.[26] In the upper register on the side that is best
the rest, and the mixture of Sumerian and Semitic types in the figures
Akkad. But it is obviously Sumerian in character, resembling the work
of Gudea's period rather than that of Narâm-Sin.
period of Sumerian art.--_Déc._, pl. 25, Figs. 4 and 6.]
Sumerian sculptors is well illustrated by two fragments of reliefs,
bas-reliefs, the Sumerian treatment is infinitely superior. The same
Sumerian work attained during the best period.
The most famous examples of Sumerian sculpture are the statues of
singularly striking, and the manner in which the Sumerian sculptor has
to the best period of Sumerian art.--_Déc._, pl. 25, Fig. 2.]
The art of casting in metal was also practised by the Sumerians, and
Sumerians, and their stage of culture throughout the long period of
very unsatisfactory evidence, that the Sumerian metal-founders used not
No trace has yet been found of any mould used by the Sumerians in the
The art of inlaying was widely practised by the Sumerians, who not
more fantastic side of Sumerian art, inspired by a large and important
illustrate the Sumerian origin of later Babylonian demonology.
light upon the manner in which Sumerian art reflected this aspect of
the Sumerian religion. Some of the legends and beliefs may well have
traced to the Sumerians themselves.
The engraving upon cylinder-seals during the Sumerian period appears
the Sumerian draughtsman had attained to a high standard of proficiency.
Sumerian period. _Déc._, pl. 46, No. 3; cf. Cat. p. 189]
draughtsmanship attained by the earlier Sumerians. In vigour and
before the close of the Assyrian empire. But the Sumerian artists only
of animal forms by the Sumerians.
naturalistic treatment in Sumerian design.--_Déc._, pl. 46, Nos. 4, 5,
found upon the most primitive Sumerian cylinder-seals, and its rough
The Sumerians do not appear to have used complete shells for engraving,
Since it is not a fine specimen of its class, we may suppose that it
Sumerians at a later period engraved designs upon mother-of-pearl.
to a period of decadence in Sumerian art when it had lost much of its
mother-of pearl, engraved with Sumerian designs, which were employed
decadence in Sumerian art.--In the Louvre; Cat. Nos. 232 ff.]
Sumerian art may serve to vindicate the claim of the Sumerians to a
that of the Sumerians is considerably more than this. Its sculpture
the Sumerian sculptor was never a slave to them. He relied largely on
the hands of the later Semites the Sumerian ideals were not maintained.
combination is that proposed by Schnabel, who accepts the date of 2232
[21] Our knowledge of Sumerian art is mainly derived from the finds at
is adopted by Meyer in "Sumerier und Semiten," but he is inclined to
[25] The rite is represented upon other Sumerian monuments such as the
252. Meyer also credits the earliest Sumerians with using bronze beside
[36] See Loftus, "Chaldaea and Susiana," p. 268 f., who describes
assumed that, already at the time of the Sumerian immigration, rude
Sumerians themselves during the earliest periods to which we can trace
back their history. At Fâra, the most primitive Sumerian site that has
most powerful Sumerian goddess, Ninni or Nanâ of Erech, already has her
pre-Sargonic period. In reconstructing the plan of the later areas
appears to agree with that in the time of Narâm-Sin as revealed by
cores of earlier and smaller towers, erected by Narâm-Sin and during
the pre-Sargonic period. In fact, Ur-Engur considerably altered the
raised the level of the inner court above Narâm-Sin's pavement, and he
straightened the course of the outer wall, using that of Narâm-Sin as
dates from the period of Samsu-iluna, who upon a cone found in _débris_
the gradual increase in the size of a Sumerian city, and the manner in
an early Sumerian temple; for on early sites such as Fâra, Surghul,
private dwellings, they are the only buildings of the early Sumerians
ones south-west and north-east, in accordance with the normal Sumerian
those of Gudea or of Sargon and Narâm-Sin, but oblong and plano-convex,
The earliest written records of the Sumerians which we possess, apart
acknowledged the suzerainty of the other. Unlike other Sumerian figures
Thus Lupad presents no exception to the general Sumerian method of
such figures of archaic Sumerian type have been recovered, and three
Its discoverers claimed that it was the earliest example of Sumerian
It is in the city of Lagash that our knowledge of Sumerian history may
Sumerian cities in the south. The fact that after his victory Utug
Sumerian family in Lagash, but, whether he obtained the throne by
a dedicatory character, but, to judge from those of other Sumerian
may be seen in his relations to Enki, the Sumerian prototype of the
and most sacred of Sumerian shrines, and we may perhaps picture Ur-Ninâ
the god from whose festival one of the Sumerian months took its name.
ENTEMENA, PATESI OF SHIRPURLA.--_In the Louvre; Déc. en Chald., pl._ 5
throne is in this scene, not Anita, but Sagantug, while the figure
[Illustration: Fig 43.--Early Sumerian figure of a women, showing the
Sumerian dress and the method of doing the hair.--_Déc., pl_ 1 _ter_,
performed by Anita and Saguntug for the king.
of Babylon, probably had its counterpart at the centres of Sumerian
the early Sumerians.[50] Thus it is possible that Ur-Ninâ's daughter
[13] Cf. Banks, "Scientific American," Aug. 19, 1905, p. 137, and
[24] Since the central cult of Ninni and of Anu was at Erech, it is
not acquire its later significance until the age of Sargon
(Shar-Gani-sharri), but that it was used by earlier rulers as
[40] Cf. Meyer, "Sumerier und Semiten," p. 77.
battle and Babbar, the Sun-god who makes the city bright, would advance
Eannatum then turns to Ninkharsag, the goddess of the Sumerian city of
Before Babbar, the Sun-god, in his city of Larsa, Eannatum states that
example of early Sumerian art that has come down to us, and the
primitive Sumerian inhabitants of Babylonia.[14] In the text engraved
since they afford us a picture of these early Sumerian peoples as they
for they give a vivid picture of the Sumerian method of fighting,
in use at this early period. We note that the Sumerians advanced to
Considerable light is thrown upon the burial customs of the Sumerians
may infer from a similar scene on another early Sumerian relief that
of Ur and Erech with that of Ki-babbar, "the place of the Sun-god," a
the centre of the cult of the Sun-god in Southern Babylonia. It would
Babbar, the Sun-god, in Larsa. These passages we may assume refer to
of Southern Babylonia, may well have been the cause of his arousing the
Sunanam. The conquest of this last place is only mentioned in a broken
sought in Southern Babylonia. We are thus without data for settling
confederation of the great Sumerian cities, she successfully disputed
he built the wall of Lagash and made it strong. Since Ur-Ninâ's time,
early Sumerian sculpture, in itself admirably symbolizes the ambition
and embellished in honour of the goddess Ninni. Since Enannatum was
still uncertain, it would appear to have been situated in Southern
conferred on the cities of Southern Babylonia over which he ruled, he
example of Sumerian metal work that has yet been recovered. The vase,
that of the earlier reservoir constructed by Eannatum. Since the
PATESI OF SHIRPURLA.--_In the Louvre; Déc. en Chald., pl._ 43 (_bis_).]
bears the same name as the wife of the patesi.[29] Since, therefore,
and religious beliefs of the Sumerians.[32] From the traces upon
on the part of the earlier Sumerians, of the principal legends that
sealings are no less important for the study of Sumerian art, and
the Sumerians for a considerable length of time. While the designs
the Sargonic period. Another peculiarity which may here be referred
of a Sumerian court an amount of oppression and misery, the existence
given her, at least for a time, the hegemony in Southern Babylonia. But
was of Sumerian origin.[46] It is probable that Urukagina himself,
origin of his laws to the Sun-god, whom he represents upon his stele
probably not to the famous temple of the Sun-god at Larsa, but to his
of Enlil and in the shrine of the Sun-god; they have shed blood in the
Southern Babylonia. We know that in course of time the city rose again
[1] See Messerschmidt, "Vorderasiatische Schriftdenkmäler," I., p. v..
[7] Cf. "Vorderas. Schriftdenkmäler," I., p. v., pl. 4, No. 5 _a-d_.
tablet of the period of Hammurabi or Samsu-iluna (cf. Ungnad, "Orient.
Since a tablet of the period of Urukagina enumerates offerings made
understanding by Enki; whose name was spoken by Babbar (the Sun-god);
Larsa, the beloved city of the Sun-god, he watered with waters of joy;
stood Ur, the city of the Moon-god, and Larsa, the city of the Sun-god;
on a confederation of all the Sumerian city-states.
It is true that Shar-Gani-sharri of Akkad, at a rather later period,
achievement. For Erech, the capital of his kingdom, was in Southern
which he may have penetrated to the Syrian coast. Such an expedition,
hitherto followed by the rulers of Sumerian city-states, and its
It is fortunate for our knowledge of early Sumerian history that the
set before the time of Shar-Gani-sharri of Akkad is proved by the
used by Shar-Gani-sharri as a door-socket in the temple he erected at
the pre-Sargonic period, and it is to be noted that Erech is mentioned
included the principal cities of Southern Babylonia under their sway.
Eannatum, the northern city was a terror to the Sumerian states in the
been discovered,[17] the name of this Sumerian king unfortunately does
other Sumerian kings we have referred to, he ascribes his installation
striking victory this unknown Sumerian ruler had achieved over the
but both Kish and Opis were sacked, and the Sumerian king returned
whether these earlier kings and patesis were of Sumerian or Semitic
Shar-Gani-sharri and consolidated by Narâm-Sin. In spite of the absence
Sumerian domination in the north. At Sippar also we have evidence of
preceding Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin. In an unpublished tablet
having taken place, at any rate from the time of Shar-Gani-sharri; and
Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin with which it was found. From this it
follows that Urumush was anterior to Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin,
been the aggressors, and had succeeded in penetrating into Sumerian
Baz, which lay near the city of Dûr-Sin; the second side records
been cited which proves that Urumush was anterior to Shar-Gani-sharri
and Narâm-Sin. In Manishtusu, therefore, we have another Semitic king
have ruled after, and not before, Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin,[39]
is indicated by the reference to Southern Babylonian cities in his
by Manishtusu, King of Kish. Since both the fragments were found at
temple at Sippar, and were dedicated by Manishtusu to the Sun-god in
to have been brought from Akkad to Susa by Shutruk-nakhkhunte,[41] and
inscriptions by native Elamite rulers such as Basha-Shushinak.[49] But
The fall of Lagash had been followed by a confederation of Sumerian
in the power of Kish was not followed by any fresh access of Sumerian
Shar-Gani-sharri with the city of Akkad as his capital. The evidence of
the north. In the following chapter we shall see that Shar-Gani-sharri
Sumerian rendering Uru-mu-ush is now in general use. A preferable
all bear the legend of Shutruk-nakhkhunte, conqueror of Ishnunuk, also
The name of Sargon of Agade, or Akkad, bulks largely in later
Narâm-Sin has caused the Dynasty of Akkad to be taken as the canon,
by so doing, detracted from the significance of Sargon's position in
his empire, the terms "Pre-Sargonic" and "Post-Sargonic" have been very
Shar-Gani-sharri of Akkad, and of tablets dated in his reign, removed
and the identification of Shar-Gani-sharri with the Sargon of the
as certainly established, it was the historical character of Sargon of
by which Sargon's name was recovered and his position in history
Sargon's name was first met with in certain explanatory texts of a
name Sharru-ukîn,[1] or Sargon, king of Agade, from which it appeared
In the year 1867, attention was first directed to Sargon's place in
the famous Legend of Sargon,[3] in which the king is represented as
by George Smith, who added a translation of the Omens of Sargon and
Narâm-Sin, which he had just come across in the collections of tablets
from Kuyunjik.[5] Smith followed Rawlinson in ascribing to Sargon the
of Narâm-Sin's father in the broken cylinder of Nabonidus found by
Up to this time no original text of Shar-Gani-sharri's reign was
Ibni-sharru, a high official in Shar-Gani-sharri's service, of which
read the king's name as "Shegani-shar-lukh," and he did not identify
him with Sargon the elder (whom he put in the nineteenth century B.C.),
the date of Narâm-Sin, "the son of Sargon."[9] In the following year
the British Museum acquired the famous mace-head of Shar-Gani-sharri,
Sippar; this was the first actual inscription of Shar-Gani-sharri to be
found. In place of Ménant's reading "Shegani-shar-lukh," the name was
read as "Shargani," the two final syllables being cut off from it and
of Shargani of Agade with Sargon the elder was assumed as certain.[10]
Unlike Sargon, the historical character of Narâm-Sin presented no
his identification with the Narâm-Sin mentioned by Nabonidus on his
Apart from the difficulty presented by Sargon's name, the absence of
early records concerning the reign of Shar-Gani-sharri for a time
was easy to see in the later Babylonian traditions concerning Sargon
the name of Shar-Gani-sharri and recording his building of the temple
inscription of Shar-Gani-sharri, while the rest bore the briefer
inscription of Narâm-Sin. The pavement had apparently been laid by
Sargon and partly re-laid by Narâm-Sin, who had utilized some of the
in favour of identifying Shar-Gani-sharri with Sargon I., "the father
of Narâm-Sin."[15]
by events in the reigns of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin. This was
of the Omen-tablet,[16] and from that time the identity of Sargon
and Shar-Gani-sharri was not seriously called in question. Finally,
usually known by the title of Sargon I., or Sargon of Agade.
Shar-Gani-sharri with the Sargon of later tradition was made at Susa in
than in Eannatum's sculpture. That they are Semitic and not Sumerian
his clothing has Sumerian characteristics, he is of the Semitic type.
of the two forms under which Sargon's name is written in Assyrian and
as we have seen, Sargon, the traditional father of Narâm-Sin, has been
identified with Shar-Gani-sharri of Akkad. The question obviously
with Shar-Gani-sharri? Can we suppose that a contemporary scribe
invented this rendering of Shar-Gani-sharri's name, and thus gave rise
problem, is clearly right in treating Sharru-Gi and Shar-Gani-sharri as
Narâm-Sin are both mentioned on a tablet from Tello. On these grounds
Sharru-ukîn (=Sargon), was the father of Narâm-Sin, as represented
in the late tradition; Shar-Gani-sharri he would regard as another
sovereign of Akkad, of the same dynasty as Sargon and Narâm-Sin and one
anterior to Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin, though his reign may not
these conclusions, if Narâm-Sin had been the son of Sharru-Gi, as
Tello, on which the names of Sharru-Gi and Narâm-Sin are mentioned,
that Sharru-Gi was not the founder of Narâm-Sin's dynasty, but was a
earlier king of Kish. Since then I have recognized a duplicate text of
the Sun-god Shamash and his consort Aa in the city of Sippar, and the
devotion to the great temple of the Sun-god in that city.[28] For
of the name, Sargon, was not identical with Shar-Gani-sharri, King
name. To the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian scribes Sargon appears as a
king of Agade, or Akkad, and the father of Narâm-Sin, who succeeded
real name, Shar-Gani-sharri, has disappeared in the tradition. Are
to Sargon of Akkad, were also borrowed along with his name from the
historical Sargon of Kish? Or is it possible that the traditional
Sargon is representative of his period, and combines in his one person
chronicle, which states that in Sargon's old age "all the lands
Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin, and the date-formulæ occurring upon
tablets dated in Shar-Gani-sharri's reign, we find three date-formulæ
ascribed to Sargon in the Omen-tablet and the Neo-Babylonian Chronicle.
victory for Sargon, and apparently the deportation of the king of
Amurru to Akkad; while in the fourth Sargon is recorded to have set
accounts from Tello is dated "in the year in which Shar-Gani-sharri
conquest of Amurru, ascribed by tradition to Sargon of Akkad, is to be
referred to Shar-Gani-sharri and treated as historically true.
testing Sargon's Elamite campaigns. The Omen-tablet opens with the
record of Sargon's invasion of the country, followed by his conquest
Shar-Gani-sharri overcame the expedition which Elam and Zakhara had
by Sargon, not a raid into Babylonian territory by the Elamites. But
the contemporary document at least proves that Shar-Gani-sharri was
year in which Shar-Gani-sharri laid the foundations of the temple of
Sargon devoted himself to its adornment by building temples there. The
late Chronicle records that Sargon removed the soil from the trenches
Thus, wherever we can test the achievements ascribed to Sargon of Akkad
by comparison with contemporary records of Shar-Gani-sharri's reign,
traditional picture of Sargon admirably suits the founder of a dynasty
Sargon, both in raising him to the throne and in guiding his arms to
victory.[38] For Akkad, which Shar-Gani-sharri made his capital, was
records that Sargon conquered Subartu and Kazallu, we may ascribe these
victories to Shar-Gani-sharri, although they are unrecorded in the
a text of Shar-Gani-sharri's reign, as that of Mannu-dannu of Magan
has been recovered on a statue of Narâm-Sin.[39] Such an attitude of
Chronicle of Sargon, to which reference has been made, must be treated
these early empires were based, Shar-Gani-sharri, like Manishtusu, may
subjected to his rule. In such a case the scribe of Shar-Gani-sharri
Our conclusion, therefore, is that in the later texts Shar-Gani-sharri
it is clear that Sargon's traditional achievements may be credited to
Shar-Gani-Sharri, who, as king of Agade or Akkad, succeeded to the
of the Dynasty of Akkad. The modelling of the figures on Narâm-Sin's
of Narâm-Sin there has hitherto been a gap in the orderly stages of
the formal though decorative conventions of the earlier Sumerian time,
design and treatment, prove direct continuity with early Sumerian art.
of Narâm-Sin, but his work is its direct forerunner. To judge from the
Sumerians, proving that the Semitic immigration into Northern Babylonia
with him we are appreciably nearer to the time of Sumerian domination
suggest Sumerians, and their clothing, which the king himself shares,
Sumerian influence, either in actual life or in artistic convention.
Such a mixture of Sumerian and Semitic characteristics would be quite
rulers of Kish had not yet proved themselves superior to Sumerian
conquests of Shar-Gani-sharri. We there saw that Manishtusu claims to
were carried beyond the Elamite border. Since the fragments of his
they had been dedicated in the great temple of the Sun-god, it is
Shar-Gani-sharri would seem to indicate that the authority of these
the later tradition is silent, merely recording that Sargon obtained
"the kingdom" through Ishtar's help. That Shar-Gani-sharri was the
tradition related that Sargon's native city was Azupirânu, and it
ensured for Sargon the position of a national hero in the minds of the
Sumer, and Shar-Gani-sharri seems to have devoted his energies to
Shar-Gani-sharri laid the foundations of the temples of Anunitu and
contents. We are thus without the means of arranging Shar-Gani-sharri's
eleventh year of Shar-Gani-sharri's reign.[51] Indeed, the fact that
coast Shar-Gani-sharri made a striking advance upon the ideals of
in penetrating to the Syrian coast.[52] But Shar-Gani-sharri's
It has been claimed on behalf of Shar-Gani-sharri that he did not
Shar-Gani-sharri, and had shared the elaborate system of communication
Sargon's Omen-tablet to the effect that "he crossed the Sea of the
poetical summary of Sargon's might, elaborating in greater detail the
together as having formed the extreme limits of Sargon's empire. On
the littoral of the Persian Gulf, which Shar-Gani-sharri doubtless
we may connect the tradition, reproduced in the Legend of Sargon,
maritime enterprise in this region we may compare that of Sennacherib
outlet for the trade of the Sumerian cities in the south. In organizing
Shar-Gani-sharri would have had native ships and sailors at his
In the internal administration of his empire Shar-Gani-sharri appears
of Narâm-Sin have been found in place.[56] The mace-head from Abû
Sun-god in Northern Babylonia; while one of his date-formulæ supports
useless _débris_ during the reigns of Shar-Gani-sharri himself and his
as "Shar-Gani-sharri, the mighty, the king of Akkad: Lugal-ushumgal,
Narâm-Sin's reign appears to have been addressed simply "To Lagash,"
of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin, a regular system of communication
took place from Akkad and the north. Among southern Sumerian cities
invoiced in the lists. The conquests of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin
Shar-Gani-sharri was enabled to establish an efficient control over
in Shar-Gani-sharri's reign, and, although under the kings of Ur
of Sargon's reign. It will be remembered that the obelisk records the
traditions concerning Sargon's high-handed treatment of "the sons of
his palace."[62] The Neo-Babylonian Chronicle relates that Sargon
royal palace; and they are recorded to have appealed to Sargon to tell
basis as that suggested in the preceding paragraph. Shar-Gani-sharri
were bound to come to a head, and in Shar-Gani-sharri's own case we
of Shar-Gani-sharri. Both the Omen-tablet and the Chronicle relate
account of Sargon's reign with a record of disaster. "Because of the
of Sargon's reign.[64] The reference to Sargon's closing years on the
Chronicles. The writer traces Sargon's misfortunes to his own evil
permissible to see in the evil deeds ascribed to Sargon a reference to
There can be little doubt that Shar-Gani-sharri was succeeded on the
throne of Akkad by Narâm-Sin, whom we may regard with considerable
Narâm-Sin is represented as the son of Sargon, and, although in his own
proof that his reign and that of Shar-Gani-sharri were very close
to one another. The relation of Shar-Gani-sharri's pavement in the
temple of Ekur to that of Narâm-Sin and the similar character of their
Lagash, was the contemporary of both Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin[65]
supports the presumption that the latter was Shar-Gani-sharri's
Narâm-Sin's fame as a great conqueror, like that of his father,
the land of Magan is still unsettled, some setting it in the Sinaitic
favour of the latter view it may be noted that from Southern Babylonia
transport of heavy blocks of diorite, which Narâm-Sin, and at a rather
by water than overland. In that case Narâm-Sin's invasion of Magan was
in direct continuation of Shar-Gani-sharri's policy of extending his
In the inscription upon this same statue, which Narâm-Sin records was
quarters (of the world)." Shar-Gani-sharri, in addition to his usual
assumption by Narâm-Sin was based on a definite claim to a world-wide
However this may be, we have ample evidence of Narâm-Sin's military
year. Conquests recorded in other inscriptions of Narâm-Sin are that of
Armanu,[67] and of Satuni, king of Lulubu.[68] The latter region lay to
The monument, which Narâm-Sin set up and dedicated in the temple of
of the king conquering Satuni and his other enemies in a mountainous
throat. Two others lie prone before Narâm-Sin, who has planted his foot
his reign. But, in addition to Narâm-Sin's own text, the stele bears a
later inscription of the Elamite king Shutruk-Nakhkhunte, from which
off to Susa as a trophy of war. But it is not unlikely that Narâm-Sin,
like Shar-Gani-sharri and the kings of Kish, achieved successes
deportation of the native king, as Shar-Gani-sharri deported the kings
Within the limits of Sumer and Akkad Narâm-Sin appears to have followed
not neglect the shrines of Lagash. Another Sumerian city in which he
of the Taurus, and, after running parallel to the Sebene Su, joins
[Illustration: Fig. 59.--Stele sculptured with the figure of Narâm-Sin,
evidence of the extent of Narâm-Sin's influence northwards. The
four quarters of the world. That Narâm-Sin and his army should have
Of Narâm-Sin's successors upon the throne of Akkad we know little. The
succeeded his father upon the throne. Another son of Narâm-Sin, the
daughter and lyre-player to the Moon-god, Sin.[80] The famous seal of
probably Ubil-Ishtar, and he is followed by a Sumerian servant, whom we
head and fringed garment of the Sumerians are here retained by the
scribe, suggesting that, though the Sumerians were employed by their
A comparison of the monument with Narâm-Sin's Stele of Victory will
when the dynasty of Shar-Gani-sharri may have fallen before the onset
as Sharru-Gi, for we should then have to assume that Shar-Gani-sharri's
provisionally to Shar-Gani-sharri himself. It will have been noted
that the foes sculptured upon the monument are Semites, not Sumerians,
on whose defeat by Shar-Gani-sharri the whole of Sumer, including the
Shar-Gani-sharri put an end to the domination of Kish and founded his
The absence of Sumerians from the battle-scenes in the reliefs of the
of the Sumerians was adopted by their conquerors, at whose hands it
the stiff conventions of his Sumerian teachers, and, while borrowing
a cylinder-seal as that of Ibni-sharru, Shar-Ganni-sharri's scribe,
the figures upon Narâm-Sin's stele, their natural attitudes, and
rule over the four quarters of the world may have led Narâm-Sin to
Shar-Gani-sharri in two inscriptions that have come down to us. In
nearly every text of Narâm-Sin the determinative for deity precedes
among the earlier Sumerian kings and patesis, and we may with some
pl. 39, No. 5, l. 41, where Sargon's name occurs in conjunction with
Dûr-Sharrukîn, "Sargon's Fortress," was also referred to him.
[3] Rawlinson announced his discovery of the Legend of Sargon in the
suggestion that Sargon of Assyria, the father of Sennacherib, may have
been called "the later Sargon" (_Sharru-ukîn arkû_) "to distinguish him
ll. 29-32; Oppert had restored the name of Narâm-Sin's father as
Ménant adhered to his former opinion that Shargani-shar-lukh (as he now
[18] _Shargani_, the first part of the name Shar-Gani-sharri, was
[29] King, "Chronicles," Vol. II., pp. 27 ff., Sections II, IV., V.,
[31] "Chronicles," Vol. II., p. 25 f., Section I.
the Legend of Sargon (see "Chronicles," Vol. II., p. 92), may possibly
be connected with this campaign of Shar-Gani-sharri.
monument accords with this suggestion. Shar-Gani-sharri ascribes no
has recently pointed out the occurrence of the name _Sha-ru-ki-in_, on
of a ruler of "the four quarters." Since the final _n_ can hardly be
early existence of the name _Sharrukîn_, Sargon, which would be the
[43] I is therefore still permissible to employ the name "Sargon" as
a synonym of Shar-Gani-sharri, the predecessor of Narâm-Sin upon the
throne of Akkad. Similarly the terms "Pre-Sargonic" and "Post-Sargonic"
Shar-Gani-sharri have been employed for the sake of clearness.
[55] In the commercial tablets of the period of Shar-Gani-sharri and
Narâm-Sin, reference is frequently made to transport by water. Thus the
of Narâm-Sin's successful efforts, at the beginning of his reign, to
to Shar-Gani-sharri, another has been recovered with a similar address
to Narâm-Sin, which he evidently employed after the latter's ascension
temple to Sin, the Moon-god; see King, "Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch.," Nov.
Persia to Samsun, and the exact spot was pointed out to me where the
stele was found. Narâm-Sin's building, or platform, was on lower ground
Narâm-Sin's time, and that its excavation would be a comparatively
Narâm-Sin and Bin-Gani-sharri; see Thureau-Dangin, "Rec. de tabl.," p.
Narâm-Sin's son.
not characteristic of the Sargonic period, may perhaps be explained as
written in Semitic Babylonian. The sculptured panel at Sheikh-Khân,
ruins of the latter monarchy that Shar-Gani-sharri founded his empire,
of the earlier Sumerians furnished the models upon which the immigrant
politics a Sumerian reaction followed the period of Semitic power, and
much to the period of Narâm-Sin, so the empire of Dungi was inevitably
influenced by Shar-Gani-sharri's conquests. There was no sudden arrest
A recovery of power by the Sumerians merely changed the direction in
that between the reign of Narâm-Sin and that of Ur-Engur, the founder
It will be remembered that under Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin a
have been the contemporary of Narâm-Sin,[2] and in that case he must
attribution of this group of tablets to the period between the Sargonic
that of the epoch of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin. On the strength of
tightly drawn than at the time of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin.
and imported his building materials from Arabia and the Syrian coast.
that of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin. But it is a remarkable fact
Gudea's reign may be regarded as marking a revival of Sumerian
the Sumerians at this epoch, and of the elaborate ritual with which
chamberlain; Shakanshabar, his grand vizir; Uri-zi, the keeper of
life of the Sumerians is well illustrated by these records of the
of Ningirsu's _entourage_ proves that the Sumerian city-god was
foundation-inscriptions of Narâm-Sin and Shagarakti-Buriash in the
evidence that, like Sar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin, he assumed divine
It was the custom of the Sumerian patesis to give long and symbolical
Gudea no Sumerian ruler had ever laid claim to divine rank. It is true
[2] It has been suggested that Ur-E was Narâm-Sin's contemporary,
since his name and that of Narâm-Sin are both found on the same tablet
"Königsinschriften," p. 59, n. 1); but the phrase in which Narâm-Sin's
same phrase with Narâm-Sin, and, although no title follows his name, we
name of Lugal-bur is found upon a tablet of the Sargonic period (see
civilization between the age of Narâm-Sin and the rise of the city
as typical of the condition of the other great Sumerian cities. The
system of government, by means of which Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin
or empire of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin, must have acted as a
of a revolt of all the lands in the latter part of Sargon's reign. Ur
Southern Babylonia[2] it is possible, however, to gather some idea
at Senkera, which record his rebuilding of the temple of Babbar, the
Sun-god. With the acquisition of Lagash, he was doubtless strong enough
Ishkun-Sin, whose seal is now preserved in the British Museum,[4] was
in accordance with the laws of the Sun-god, he caused justice to
the reigns of Sargon and Narâm-Sin, are followed by a short account
Late tradition retained the memory of Sargon's building activity in
the oldest and most venerated temple of the Sumerians. Dungi's care for
age. The time was ripe for a Sumerian reaction, and Ur-Engur's initial
Other evidence is not lacking of the Sumerian national revival, which
inscriptions every one is written in Sumerian, in striking contrast to
the texts which date from the time of Shar-Gani-sharri and Narâm-Sin.
is from the northern city of Cutha. The predominant use of Sumerian
brick-inscription giving the name and titles of Gimil-Sin, which was
the kings of Ur and Isin, are invariably Sumerian in character.[7] A
Sumerian, resembling the seals of Lagash at the time of Gudea and
the worshippers engraved upon the seals are Sumerians, not Semites.
has a shaven head and wears the fringed Sumerian tunic. There can
Sumerians, and we may probably regard the Dynasty of Isin as a
of the inhabitants of Southern Babylonia, the official lists and
of Sargon's reign. In his twenty-sixth year he appointed his daughter
Sumerians. These districts, and others of which we have no knowledge,
Sumerians was the spear, and they delivered their attack in close
them to break up and demoralize the serried ranks of the Sumerians,
Narâm-Sin at a time when the empire of Akkad had reached its zenith.
at a period it would seem shortly before his adoption of Narâm-Sin's
the determinative for divinity before his name. Like Narâm-Sin, who
been the first Sumerian ruler to claim divine honours. By so doing he
Sumerian rulers Elam was a name of terror, associated with daring raids
for the ordinary purposes of life.[14] Basha-Shushinak,[15] patesi
down Shushinak's vengeance upon the impious, but adds invocations to
Sin, Ninni or Ishtar, and Ninkharsag. We could not have more striking
towards the Sumerian domination of the country. In establishing his own
the city of Susa, influenced by Sumerian culture, though chiefly
rebuilt there the temple of Shushinak the national god,[17] and it may
Nagidda, who were patesis of Adamdun during this period, are Sumerian.
of the other great Sumerian religious centres during Dungi's reign.
had been stored by the Sumerian priests. Though they had apparently
In spite of Dungi's devotion to the ancient Sumerian cult of Enki
from their place at the head of the Sumerian pantheon; the Moon-god,
in Ur. Subordinate officials could employ Dungi's name, not that of
of Bûr-Sin's reign. Among the public works undertaken by Dungi in
Bûr-Sin was already advanced in years when he succeeded his father
nine years, and Gimil-Sin, his son who succeeded him, for only seven
years.[26] A longer reign was that of Ibi-Sin, Gimil-Sin's son and
interest to note that under Bûr-Sin and his son the importance of the
come down to us. Bûr-Sin's regular titles of "King of Ur, king of the
Gimil-Sin describes himself as "the beloved of Enlil," "whom Enlil
inscriptions found at Nippur we know that Bûr-Sin added to the great
of a great throne in Enlil's honour. Gimil-Sin appears to have been
cult of the Moon-god, the patron deity of Ur, for both Bûr-Sin and
Gimil-Sin rebuilt and added to the great temple of Sin, or Nannar,
shrine of Enki at Eridu; and there is evidence that Bûr-Sin rebuilt
the temple of Ninni at Erech, while the last year of Gimil-Sin's reign
divine determinative before their names, but Bûr-Sin styles himself
land." He also set up a statue of himself, which he named "Bûr-Sin,
of Gimil-Sin, which stood in the two principal temples of Lagash,
tablet is dated in the fifth year of Gimil-Sin's reign. In view of
in honour of Gimil-Sin, "his god." At the king's death his cult did
at Nineveh, where Bûr-Sin's name is explained as that of an attendant
found at Susa dated by the official formulæ of Bûr-Sin,[31] proving
and Khukhunuri, or Khukhnuri. The date-formulæ of Gimil-Sin's reign
record that he conquered Simanu in his third year, and four years
later the land of Zabshali, while the only conquest of Ibi-Sin of
of Gimil-Sin's authority in the direction of the Mediterranean may
Murîk-Tidnim. Since Tidnu was explained by the Assyrian geographers
Of the comparatively long reign of Ibi-Sin, and of the events which
Sumerian life, which would tend to undermine the military qualities of
fortress, founded a temple for the worship of Gimil-Sin, and it is
towards the end of Bûr-Sin's reign[34] and continued to hold it under
Ibi-Sin. But the patesiate of Lagash was only one of many posts which
the cult of Gimil-Sin, and in the inscriptions upon them he has left us
Timat-Enlil, patesi of Al-Gimil-Sin,[36] governor of Urbillu, patesi
Gimil-Sin Arad-Nannar thus combined in his own person twelve important
was patesi before him, records in Sumerian his building of the great
[10] In spite of the use of Sumerian for their inscriptions and the
[15] The name has also been read as Karibu-sha-Shushinak. He does not
[26] Gimil-Sin possibly reigned for nine years; see Kugler,
"Sternkunde," II., p. 151 f. Another son of Bûr-Sin was Ur-Bau, whose
of Ibi-Sin.
[36] "The City of Gimil-Sin," _i.e._, a town named after the reigning
probably Sumerians like their immediate predecessors, and they shared
between the great Sumerian cities, and any one of them would have
against the rule of Ur, and had been the direct agent in Ibi-Sin's
the fall of "Ibi-Sin, the King of Ur," who, it states, was carried
that, in the course of the twenty-five years of his reign, Ibi-Sin had
ruler. For a time Ibi-Sin may have continued to hold certain districts,
that of Basha-Shushinak.[4] In addition to Khutran-tepti himself, the
and his son Kal-Rukhuratir, and his grandson Itaddu II. Since these
resulted in the deportation of Ibi-Sin, no doubt freed Elam for a time
thirty-four years, occupied by the reigns of Sin-magir and his son
Sun-god at Larsa for the preservation of his own life and that of
years he was followed by his son Bûr-Sin II., who bore the same titles
of Isin were sons of Bûr-Sin. Of Iter-kasha, who reigned for only
In the chronicle concerning Sargon of Akkad and other early Babylonian
struggle that followed Ur-imitti's death a certain Sin-ikisha[26]
respectively, and only with Sin-magir, the fifteenth king of Isin, was
seventeenth year of Sin-muballit, the fifth king of the First Dynasty
of Isin by Rîm-Sin, King of Larsa, is also recorded in formulas upon
date-formulæ of Rîm-Sin and Sin-muballit refer to the same capture
Sin-muballit, and the dynasties of Isin and of Babylon would have
contemporary of Bûr-Sin II., king of Isin, in the sixth year of whose
definitely fixed, but the chronology for the later periods of Sumerian
later, in the reign of Bûr-Sin, Ur-Ninib's son, the Western Semites are
governor of the city. In certain contract-tablets of Apil-Sin's reign
Apil-Sin, until he was driven out by the Amurru. Whether the Amurru are
Since the Libit-Ishtar who was driven out was not the king of Isin, the
suggestion that Damik-ilishu was Sin-muballit's contemporary, and
Isin would have been Rîm-Sin, assisted by his vassal, Sin-muballit.
But a recent discovery has shown that Rîm-Sin can hardly have been
a contemporary of Sin-muballit, or, at any rate, old enough in the
but lived on into the reign of Samsu-iluna, by whom he was apparently
has been suggested that the record concerns the son of Rîm-Sin, and not
Rîm-Sin himself.[38] But it has now been pointed out that two of the
are dated, the one by Rîm-Sin, the other in Samsu-iluna's tenth
that Rîm-Sin was in possession of a portion of Babylonia at least as
late as the ninth year of Samsu-iluna's reign.[40] If, therefore, he
captured Isin in the seventeenth year of Sin-muballit, Samsu-iluna's
the belief that Sin-muballit was Rîm-Sin's vassal, or that they
a king of Larsa that Sin-muballit captured Isin in the seventeenth
the year in which Sin-muballit defeated the army of Larsa, and we
Larsa, Sin-muballit followed up his success by capturing the city of
Sin-muballit to the seventh year of Hammurabi, the city of Isin changed
Sin-muballit's seventeenth year, and those found upon the Tell Sifr
the suggested synchronism between Damik-ilishu and Sin-muballit are
Babylon, bearing a votive inscription of Sin-magir, the fifteenth king
the new invaders the Sumerians tended to withdraw southwards into the
independent dynasty, largely of Sumerian origin, attempted to contest
career of the Sumerians as a race may be regarded as closed. Their
[11] See "Vorderasiatische Schriftdenkmäler," VII., p. 28, No. 67, and
Senkera (Larsa), which reads "the year in which Gungunu died" (see
Scheil, "Rec. de trav.," Vol. XXI., p. 125.) Since the death of a king
[26] Sin-ikisha's name, which is broken in the Nippur list, has been
dated in the year in which Sin-ikisha made an image of gold and silver
for the Sun-god.
of Sab-Dagan, which occurs as that of a king on the obverse of the
suggested reading of the name preceding Sab-Dagan as that of Ura-imitti
trav.," XXI., p. 125, though he implies that it was found at Senkera,
Samsu-iluna, which mentions not only the cities of Erech and Isin but
III., p. 229, n. 41. The only other possible year in Sin-muballit's
was done by Samsu-iluna.
In the preceding pages we have followed the history of the Sumerian
have traced the inter-relations of North and South, of Sumerians and
turn conquered by Akkadian and Sumerian kings. The question naturally
earliest of Sumerian sites, it is possible that contact with other and
early bas-reliefs and engraved seals of the Sumerians, and resemblances
Abydos, known as the Shunet ez-Zebîb, were treated as borrowed from
Sumerian originals. That irrigation was practised on the banks of the
Semitic tribes, already imbued with Sumerian culture, had reached
derived from the Sumerians of Babylonia. Crossing from southern Arabia
The Sumerian system of writing has been regarded as the parent of
between the names of Sumerian and Egyptian gods.[4] The suggestion has
burials with those of the First and Second Dynasties, has shown that
possibility of Sumerian influence having reached Egypt through channels
already known. In fact, no example of Sumerian writing has yet been
the dynastic period bear to examples of early Sumerian sculpture and
favourite monster of Sumerian art, is never found upon the Egyptian
itself are quite unlike Sumerian work. There is also no need to trace
to be met with during the Third and Fourth Dynasties. Since the dead
this was the regular Sumerian practice; and the contracted forms of
and have proved that the Sumerian corpse was regularly arranged for
circumstances, and was not the regular Sumerian practice of the
which was formerly regarded as peculiarly characteristic of Sumerian
Sumerian buildings, is never found in Egypt, where the rectangular
For Gudea maintained close commercial relations with the Syrian coast,
of the early Egyptian and Sumerian cultures. It is difficult to regard
evolved independently in Egypt and by the Sumerians. In Babylonia the
Sumerian sites, and it would appear that the Sumerian immigrants
representing the "Second Period," at a depth of from fifteen to twenty
be set at a period anterior to the earliest Sumerian settlements that
Upper Egypt from Southern Arabia,[17] or have entered Lower Egypt by
Egypt of forty ships laden with cedar-wood in Sneferu's reign. These
assume that Sneferu's predecessors had already extended their influence
along the Syrian coast.[18] It is in Syria that we may also set the
historic times. The early Sumerian ruler Lugal-zaggisi boasts that he
prelude to the conquest of Syria by Shar-Gani-sharri of Akkad.[19]
following on the latter's Syrian campaign, is to be seen in the
may now be traced with greater probability to a Sumerian source,[21]
there can be little doubt that from Shar-Gani-sharri's reign onwards
from the earliest historical period between Elam and the Sumerian and
of Sumerian influence upon the native culture of Elam have been fully
raids from the direction of Sumer and Akkad. The earliest Sumerian
interference on the part of the more powerful among the Sumerian
was subject to direct Sumerian control, the Semitic influence of
in inscriptions accompanying Semitic texts of Basha-Shushinak;[30] and,
Basha-Shushinak.[31] On the front of the throne at each side of the
It is therefore clear that at the time of Basha-Shushinak the two
connection in its origin with that of the Sumerians, and was invented
their treatment is totally different to that found on early Sumerian
early Sumerian pottery discovered at Tello, which dates from an age
Syro-Cappadocian ware;[46] and these may well belong to a Neolithic
extended to Southern Assyria also, and to non-alluvial sites on the
It would seem that the influence of Sumerian culture during the
Shar-Gani-sharri undoubtedly had important results upon the spread of
at Curium by General di Cesnola refers to the deified Narâm-Sin,[49]
that it is of Syro-Cappadocian workmanship, and does not date from a
cursory comparison of the seal with the clay-sealings of Narâm-Sin's
may well have been of Syrian or West Semitic origin. Beyond such
Semitic occupation during Shar-Gani-sharri's reign; there may well
Yet the supposed conquest of Cyprus by Shar-Gani-sharri has led to the
culverts have been found in the pre-Sargonic stratum at Nippur, at
Surghul, and at most early Sumerian sites where excavations have been
influence, through the Syro-Cappadocian channel by which doubtless the
impregnated with Sumerian culture, returned. The sea formed a barrier
and passed southwards into the Syro-Palestinian region and northwards
Of the part which the Sumerians took in originating and moulding the
of the Mosaic legislation, is now definitely known to be of Sumerian
Babylon and Assyria is based almost throughout on Sumerian originals,
and the ancient ritual of the Sumerian cults survived in the later
earliest Sumerian patesis. Sumer, in fact, was the principal source of
Sumerian god who was afterwards identified with Marduk, and _Asar_,
but there is also a resemblance between the Egyptian and Sumerian
as it is sometimes represented, for the Sumerian sign _eri_ or _uru_
the Sumerians, like the predynastic and early dynastic Egyptians,
found by M. de Sarzec at Tello. With the Sumerians its place was taken
[17] If the land of Punt may be set in Abyssinia and Somaliland, it is
connection between Egypt and Syria in Sneferu's reign.
by the bronze votive plaque of Shilkhak-In-Shushinak, recently found
the time of the Sargonids (_op. cit._, I., pl. ix., p. 159 f.).
date from the period of Shutruk-Nakhkhunte, and both in design and
ff., pl. xii ff. as "foundation offerings" from the temple of Shushinak
[34] For coloured reproductions of Susian wares, see De Morgan,
Myres would regard them as of Sargonid date, and it is true that
(1)The signs employed in the inscription are not of Narâm-Sin's period,
Syro-Cappadocian in character; they are in striking contrast to the
deification of Narâm-Sin is of course no proof that he was dead (see
above, p. 251). But it should be noted that on seals of Narâm-Sin's
Mâr-Ishtar, the owner of the seal, been a contemporary of Narâm-Sin,
the inscription on the seal would have run: "O Narâm-Sin, God of Akkad
runs: "Mâr-Ishtar, son of Ilu-bani, servant of the god Narâm-Sin." Here
of his patron deity. Narâm-Sin is no longer the living God of Akkad,
Bûr-Sin I., King of Ur, as that of a deity in the Moon-god's suite, on
Syro-Cappadocian and Hittite importations.
I.--Recent Explorations in Turkestan in their Relation to the Sumerian
theory, the original home of the Sumerians was to be sought beyond the
Sumerians on the banks of the Euphrates would thus have been a single
explorations and excavations carried out by Dr. Stein in Chinese
the Sumerian problem. But the Khotan oases and the Taklamakan Desert
extended during 1905-7 into the region of Dr. Stein's travels, along
so successfully excavated by Dr. Stein for the Indian Government.[5]
Throughout the region of the oases in Southern Turkestan, to the north
cultural contact with the Sumerians.[8]
the early inhabitants of the oases and the Sumerians of Babylonia.
of the Sumerians at Anau, nor indeed in any particular spot in Central
sites of Seistan and the Kirman province will exhibit closer parallels
We may thus picture the Sumerians before their arrival in Babylonia as
which gave rise to the Sumerian immigration and to similar racial
on their way northwards from Arabia, colonized the Syrian coast-lands
through which they passed, so the Sumerian race may well have left
oases of Iran. There are already indications that work on Syrian and
recover the cult-images of primitive Sumerian gods, and to bring to
by Dr. Stein; cp. _e.g._ "Ruins of Khotan," p. 189 f., and "Ancient
[6] After his recent journey Dr. Stein writes of the Khotan region that
figurines of a very much later date discovered by Dr. Stein at Yotkan;
settlements; but the employment of lapis-lazuli by the Sumerians may be
|  2650   | Shar-Gani-sharri,}  |                       |                    |
|  2600   | Narâm-Sin        }  | Ur-Babbar             |                    |
|         | Bûr-Sin I.,     (9)}.......... | {{Ur-Lama II.     |                    |
|         | Gimil-Sin, (7 or 9)}           | {[......]-kam     |                    |
|         | Ibi-Sin        (25)}...........|  Arad-Nannar      |                    |
|         | Bûr-Sin II.,   (21)            |                   |                    |
|         | Sin-ikisha     (1/2)           |                   |                    |
|  2100   | Sin-magir,     (11)            |                   |                    |
    Abû Shahrain, site of Eridu
    Sargon of
    Al-Gimil-Sin, "the City of Gimil-Sin"
    Sargon's conquest of
    Animal forms, Sumerian treatment of
    captivity of Ibi-Sin in
    Apil-Sin, contracts of reign of
    Arabesque pattern, on Sumerian sealing
    Art, comparison of early Sumerian
    Asari, Sumerian god
    Axe, Sumerian form of
    Sargon's buildings at
    in relation to the Dynasty of the Sea-country
    Basha-Shushinak, patesi of Susa
    Bas-reliefs, Sumerian
    Battle-axe, Sumerian use of the
    of Narâm-Sin
    Bin-Gani-sharri, son of Narâm-Sin
    Bûr-Sin I., king of Ur, reign of
    Bûr-Sin II., king of Isin
    earliest Susian form of
    of Sargon and Narâm-Sin
    of the later Sumerian period
    Clothing, Sumerian and Semitic
    Sumerian origin of
    Confiscation, Sumerian laws against
    Contracted burial, Sumerian practice of
    Crenelated buildings, Egyptian and Sumerian
    Cults, survival of Sumerian
    the Sumerian form the parent of other systems
    introduced into Babylonia by Sumerians
    Sumerian
    its alleged conquest by Sargon of Agade
    Daggers, Sumerian
    Dâti-Enlil, father of Shar-Gani-sharri
    Decadence, in Sumerian art
    Dragons, in Sumerian art
    Dûr-Sharrukîn, 217
    Dûr-Sin, 206
    relations of Sargon and Narâm-Sin with
    see also Abû Shahrain Erinda
    Garments, Sumerian and Semitic
    Gimil-Sin, king of Ur
    Gods, racial character of Sumerian
    Sumerian and Egyptian
    Harp, Sumerian form of
    Helmets, Sumerian
    Hepatoscopy, Sumerian origin of
    Ibi-Sin, king of Ur
    Ibn Serapion
    Imagery, in Sumerian art
    Inspectors, Sumerian
    Ishkun-Sin
    Khashkhamer, patesi of Ishkun-Sin
    Sumerian victories over
    Lance-bearers, Sumerian
    see also Senkera Lasirab, king of Gutiu
    Laws, Sumerian
    of the Sun-god
    Le Strange, G.
    Legends, Sumerian
    of Sargon
    Literature, influence of Sumerian
    of Shar-Gani-sharri
    Mantle, Sumerian
    Sargon and the
    Gimil-Sin and the
    Metal-casting, Sumerian
    Monsters, in Sumerian art
    _see also_ Enzu, Nannar, Sin
    Narâm-Sin, king of Akkad, reign of
    Naturalistic treatment, in Sumerian design
    Omens, of Sargon and Narâm-Sin
    Petticoat, Sumerian
    Post-Sargonic, use of term
    Pottery, Sumerian
    Pre-Sargonic, use of term
    Priesthood, power of the Sumerian
    Pûr-Sin; _see_ Bûr-Sin
    against Sargon
    Rîm-Sin, king of Larsa
    Ritual, Sumerian
    Sab-Dagan
    Sagantug
    Samsu-iluna
    Samsun
    Sand-dunes, origin of
    Sandals, introduction of
    Sangu-priest
    Sargon of Agade
    his identification with Shar-Gani-sharri
    Sargonids
    Sassanian period
    Satuni, king of Lulubu
    Schnabel, P.
    Sculpture, Sumerian
    Sea-country
    Seal-cutting
    Seal-impressions, proto-Elamite
    Seal-stones, Cretan
    Sealings
    Sebene Su
    Seistan
    Senkera, site of Larsa
    Sennacherib
    Serpents, in Sumerian art
    Shakanshabar
    Shar-Gani-sharri, king of Akkad, reign of
    his identification with Saigon
    Sharru-uktn
    Shaving, Sumerian practice of
    Shell, Sumerian use of
    Shields, Sumerian
    Shilkhak-In-Shushinak
    Shrines, local
    Shunet ez-Zebîb
    Shushinak
    Shutruk-Nakhkhunte
    Simanu
    Sin; _see also_ Nannar
    Sin-idinnam
    Sin-ikisha, king of Isin
    Sin-magir, king of Isin
    Sin-muballit
    Sinai
    Sinaitic peninsula
    Skins, clothing of
    Slate-carvings, Egyptian
    Sneferu
    Somaliland
    Southern Arabia
    Spear, or lance, Sumerian use of
    Spouting vase, symbol of the
    Standards, carried in battle
    Statues, Sumerian
    Stein, M. Aurel
    Stone, rare in Sumer
    Strong drink, fees of
    Sumerian civilization, age of
    Sumerian reaction, under the kings of Ur
    "Sumerian controversy"
    Sumerians, racial characteristics of
    Sun-god, temples of
    Sun-worship, Babylonian centres of
    Sunanam
    Synchronisms
    Syro-Arabian desert
    Syro-Cappadocian cylinder-seals
    Temples, early Sumerian
    Sumerian reaction under kings of
    Ur-Bau, son of Bûr-Sin I.
    their destruction of Sumerian towns
    Wigs, Sumerian
    Sumerian statuettes of
[Illustration: BABYLONIA Showing the Sites of Ancient Cities.]
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
